Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the control of breathing and the respiratory centres.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the control of breathing. Give me an overview of how breathing is
controlled.
Breathing is unique among the major visceral functions in being both automatic and
subject to voluntary control, and its regulation is organised to maintain the
arterial blood gases and acid-base balance while allowing breathing to serve
speech, and other behaviours.
The control system can be thought of in the usual terms of a controller,
sensors and effectors. The controller is in the brainstem,
where the respiratory centres generate the automatic rhythm of breathing and set
its depth and rate.
The sensors are the chemoreceptors, central and peripheral,
which monitor the carbon dioxide, oxygen and pH of the blood and cerebrospinal
fluid, together with mechanoreceptors in the lungs and chest wall.
The effectors are the respiratory muscles.
The brainstem rhythm is continuously adjusted by these sensory inputs,
chiefly to keep the arterial carbon dioxide constant,
and is overridden by voluntary, cortical control for speech and breath-holding.
Anaesthesia profoundly depresses this system.
So breathing is controlled by brainstem respiratory centres that generate the
automatic rhythm, adjusted by chemoreceptors sensing carbon dioxide,
oxygen and pH and by pulmonary mechanoreceptors,
and acting through the respiratory muscles;
with voluntary cortical override for behaviours such as speech — an automatic yet
voluntarily-modifiable system maintaining the blood gases,
and one depressed by anaesthesia.
Describe the respiratory centres in the brainstem.
The automatic control of breathing resides in groups of neurons in the medulla and
pons, collectively the respiratory centres,
which generate and shape the respiratory rhythm.
In the medulla are the principal centres.
The dorsal respiratory group, in the region of the nucleus of the tractus
solitarius, is concerned chiefly with inspiration and receives the visceral
afferents from the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves,
including those from the chemoreceptors and lung receptors.
The ventral respiratory group is a column of neurons concerned with both
inspiration and expiration, important in driving the expiratory muscles when
breathing is active, and containing, at its upper end, the pre-Botzinger complex,
now regarded as the principal site of generation of the respiratory rhythm.
In the pons are modulating centres: the pontine respiratory group,
including what was called the pneumotaxic centre,
which limits inspiration and smooths the transition between inspiration and
expiration, fine-tuning the rhythm.
So the respiratory centres comprise, in the medulla,
the dorsal respiratory group concerned with inspiration and receiving afferents,
and the ventral respiratory group concerned with inspiration and expiration and
containing the rhythm-generating pre-Botzinger complex; and, in the pons,
modulating centres that fine-tune the rhythm — a brainstem network generating and
shaping automatic breathing.
How is the basic respiratory rhythm generated?
The basic respiratory rhythm — the cyclical alternation of inspiration and
expiration — is generated within the brainstem itself,
by the intrinsic activity of a network of neurons,
rather than depending on any external pacemaker or sensory input,
although it is modulated by these.
The current understanding locates the principal rhythm generation in the
pre-Botzinger complex, a small group of neurons in the upper ventral respiratory
group of the medulla, which contains pacemaker-like neurons with intrinsic rhythmic
activity and forms a network that generates the basic oscillation.
The output of this network drives the inspiratory neurons,
whose activity rises in a ramp during inspiration,
activating the diaphragm and inspiratory muscles, and is then switched off,
allowing passive expiration, before the cycle repeats.
The rhythm is shaped and stabilised by the surrounding networks and the pontine
centres, and is continuously adjusted in rate and depth by the chemical and
mechanical inputs.
So the basic respiratory rhythm is generated intrinsically within the brainstem,
principally by the pacemaker-like neurons and network of the pre-Botzinger complex
in the medulla, which drives a ramping inspiratory activity that is then switched
off for expiration; the rhythm being shaped by the pontine centres and adjusted by
sensory inputs — an intrinsic neural oscillator underlying automatic breathing.
Describe the pulmonary stretch receptors and the Hering-Breuer reflexes.
Among the sensory inputs that modulate breathing are receptors within the lungs
themselves, of which the slowly-adapting pulmonary stretch receptors and their
associated Hering-Breuer reflexes are the classic example.
The slowly-adapting stretch receptors lie in the smooth muscle of the airways and
are stimulated by the stretch of the lung on inflation;
their afferents travel in the vagus to the respiratory centres.
They mediate the Hering-Breuer inflation reflex:
when the lung is inflated to a large volume,
the increasing discharge from these receptors inhibits further inspiration,
terminating the inspiratory effort and prolonging expiration — in effect,
a negative-feedback brake that prevents over-inflation.
There is also a less prominent deflation reflex,
in which collapse of the lung tends to stimulate inspiration.
In adult humans the inflation reflex is weak and operates mainly at large tidal
volumes, such as during exercise or mechanical ventilation,
being more important in the newborn.
So the slowly-adapting pulmonary stretch receptors,
stimulated by lung inflation and signalling via the vagus,
mediate the Hering-Breuer inflation reflex,
which inhibits further inspiration and prevents over-inflation,
with a weaker deflation reflex promoting inspiration;
the reflex being weak in the adult except at large tidal volumes,
but important in the newborn — a protective mechanoreceptor feedback on breathing.
Describe the other lung receptors and their reflexes.
Besides the slowly-adapting stretch receptors,
the lung contains other receptors that influence breathing and produce defensive
reflexes, important in disease and relevant to anaesthesia.
The rapidly-adapting, or irritant, receptors lie among the airway epithelial cells
and respond to mechanical and chemical irritation and to sudden changes in lung
volume; their stimulation, signalled by the vagus,
causes reflex bronchoconstriction, coughing, and increased breathing,
and they contribute to the response to irritants,
to the deeper breaths called augmented breaths,
and to the bronchoconstriction of asthma.
The juxtacapillary, or J, receptors lie in the alveolar walls close to the
capillaries and are stimulated by the engorgement or congestion of the pulmonary
capillaries and by interstitial oedema; their stimulation causes rapid,
shallow breathing, a sense of breathlessness, and reflex effects,
and they are thought to contribute to the dyspnoea of pulmonary oedema and
congestion.
There are also receptors in the chest wall and respiratory muscles,
contributing proprioceptive feedback.
So the lung also contains rapidly-adapting irritant receptors,
mediating bronchoconstriction, cough and augmented breaths in response to
irritation; and juxtacapillary J receptors,
stimulated by capillary congestion and interstitial oedema to cause rapid shallow
breathing and breathlessness; with chest-wall and muscle proprioceptors — receptors
shaping the pattern of breathing and the defensive and dyspnoeic responses.
Describe the voluntary and behavioural control of breathing.
Although breathing is fundamentally automatic,
it is also subject to voluntary and behavioural control,
which allows it to serve functions beyond gas exchange and which can override the
automatic system within limits — a dual control of considerable practical
importance.
The voluntary control originates in the cerebral cortex,
whose descending pathways can bypass the brainstem rhythm generator to act,
in part directly, on the respiratory motor neurons,
allowing breathing to be consciously altered — held, hastened, or deepened — and,
crucially, coordinated with speech, singing, coughing, sniffing,
swallowing and straining.
This voluntary override is, however, limited by the automatic chemical control:
a voluntary breath-hold is eventually broken by the rising carbon dioxide and
falling oxygen, which stimulate an overpowering urge to breathe,
so that one cannot voluntarily asphyxiate oneself.
Behavioural and emotional influences, from the limbic system and hypothalamus,
also modify breathing, as in the changes with emotion, pain and temperature.
So breathing is subject to voluntary cortical control,
allowing it to be consciously altered and coordinated with speech,
coughing and other behaviours, partly by pathways bypassing the brainstem;
this override being limited by the automatic chemical drive,
which ultimately compels breathing,
and modified by behavioural and emotional influences — a flexibility serving
non-respiratory functions while preserving gas exchange.
What are the effects of anaesthesia on the control of breathing?
Anaesthesia profoundly affects the control of breathing,
depressing the automatic control and altering the pattern,
which is one of the principal reasons that ventilation must be monitored and
frequently supported under anaesthesia.
The anaesthetic and sedative agents, and the opioids,
depress the brainstem respiratory centres,
reducing the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide — shifting the carbon dioxide
response curve to the right and reducing its slope — so that a higher carbon
dioxide is tolerated and the drive to breathe is blunted;
they also depress the hypoxic ventilatory response,
even at subanaesthetic concentrations, removing this protective drive.
The opioids characteristically slow the respiratory rate and can produce apnoea.
The agents abolish the voluntary and wakefulness drive to breathe.
The pattern of breathing is altered,
and the upper airway and respiratory muscle control is impaired.
The net effect is hypoventilation, a raised carbon dioxide,
and a loss of the normal protective responses to hypoxia and hypercapnia,
so that ventilation must be supported or controlled and monitored.
So anaesthesia depresses the control of breathing — blunting the carbon dioxide and
especially the hypoxic ventilatory responses, slowing the rate,
and abolishing the voluntary drive — causing hypoventilation and loss of protective
responses; making the monitoring and support of ventilation a central concern of
anaesthetic practice.
Pull it together: how is automatic breathing organised as a control system?
I would draw it together around breathing as a classic biological control system,
organised to maintain the arterial blood gases, principally the carbon dioxide,
while remaining flexible.
The controller is the brainstem respiratory network:
the rhythm generated intrinsically by the pre-Botzinger complex in the medulla,
shaped by the dorsal and ventral respiratory groups and the pontine centres,
producing the ramping inspiratory drive and its cyclical switching.
The sensors feed back to this controller:
the central and peripheral chemoreceptors signalling the carbon dioxide,
oxygen and pH, and the pulmonary and chest-wall mechanoreceptors signalling lung
volume and irritation, through reflexes such as the Hering-Breuer and the irritant
and J-receptor reflexes.
The effectors are the respiratory muscles. Superimposed is the voluntary cortical
control for speech and behaviour, limited by the automatic chemical drive.
The whole maintains the blood gases by negative feedback,
chiefly adjusting ventilation to hold the carbon dioxide constant.
Anaesthesia depresses the controller.
So automatic breathing is a control system with the brainstem network as controller
generating and shaping the rhythm, the chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors as
sensors feeding back, and the respiratory muscles as effectors,
with voluntary override — maintaining the blood gases by negative feedback,
and depressed by anaesthesia, an organisation underlying all of respiratory control.
Describe the central pattern of inspiratory and expiratory neuronal activity.
The brainstem network generates a stereotyped pattern of neuronal activity that
produces the cycle of breathing, and understanding it as a sequence of neuron types
and phases clarifies how the smooth rhythm arises.
The respiratory neurons fire in characteristic temporal patterns:
there are early-inspiratory, inspiratory and late-inspiratory neurons,
and post-inspiratory and expiratory neurons, firing in sequence through the cycle.
Inspiration begins with a ramp of increasing activity in the inspiratory neurons,
which progressively recruits and increases the drive to the diaphragm and
inspiratory muscles, so the lung fills smoothly rather than abruptly.
This ramp is then terminated by an inspiratory off-switch — a mechanism,
influenced by the pontine centres and by vagal stretch input, that ends inspiration.
There follows a post-inspiratory phase,
a period of declining inspiratory activity that brakes expiration and gives it a
smooth, controlled start; then, in quiet breathing, passive expiration, or,
in active breathing, expiratory neuron activity driving the expiratory muscles.
So the central pattern consists of a ramping inspiratory activity that smoothly
recruits the inspiratory muscles, terminated by an inspiratory off-switch
influenced by the pons and vagal input,
followed by a post-inspiratory braking phase and then expiration;
this orderly sequence of inspiratory,
post-inspiratory and expiratory neuronal activity producing the smooth,
controlled cycle of breathing.
Describe the effects of sleep on breathing.
Sleep has significant effects on the control of breathing,
because it removes the wakefulness drive and alters the responses,
and this is important both physiologically and as the basis of the sleep-disordered
breathing that concerns the anaesthetist.
On falling asleep, the wakefulness drive to breathe — a tonic excitatory input
present in the waking state — is lost,
so breathing becomes wholly dependent on the automatic,
chemical and metabolic control; ventilation falls slightly and the carbon dioxide
rises a little.
The ventilatory responses to carbon dioxide and to hypoxia are reduced.
In non-rapid-eye-movement sleep, breathing is regular but at a lower drive;
in rapid-eye-movement sleep, breathing becomes irregular,
and there is a marked loss of tone in the postural and upper-airway muscles.
The loss of upper-airway tone predisposes to obstruction,
the basis of obstructive sleep apnoea, in which the pharynx collapses repetitively;
and the reduced drive and the instability of the control can cause central apnoeas
and periodic breathing.
So sleep removes the wakefulness drive,
making breathing dependent on automatic control,
with reduced ventilatory responses and a slightly raised carbon dioxide;
non-rapid-eye-movement sleep gives regular low-drive breathing,
while rapid-eye-movement sleep gives irregular breathing with loss of muscle tone —
the loss of upper-airway tone predisposing to obstructive sleep apnoea,
a condition of major anaesthetic relevance.
Describe periodic breathing and Cheyne-Stokes respiration.
Periodic breathing is a pattern in which breathing waxes and wanes cyclically,
rather than being steady, and Cheyne-Stokes respiration is its classic form,
with a crescendo-decrescendo pattern alternating with apnoea;
both arise from instability in the feedback control of breathing.
The control of breathing is a negative-feedback system with a delay — the time for
blood to carry the gases from the lungs to the chemoreceptors — and like any such
system it can become unstable and oscillate if the feedback gain is too high or the
delay too long.
In Cheyne-Stokes respiration, there is a cyclical pattern: a period of deep,
increasing then decreasing breathing — the crescendo-decrescendo — followed by a
period of apnoea, repeating.
It occurs when the chemoreceptor responses are exaggerated,
or the circulation slowed so the delay is long, as in heart failure,
or at altitude, and in some neurological conditions;
the overshooting ventilation drives the carbon dioxide low, causing apnoea,
after which the carbon dioxide rises and drives the next overshoot.
So periodic breathing is a cyclical waxing and waning of ventilation from
instability in the delayed negative-feedback control;
Cheyne-Stokes respiration is its crescendo-decrescendo form alternating with
apnoea, occurring with a long circulatory delay as in heart failure, at altitude,
or in neurological disease — an oscillation of the breathing control system.
How does the respiratory system respond to an added mechanical load?
The respiratory control system compensates for added mechanical loads — increases
in the resistance or elastance against which it must work — so as to defend
ventilation, and the mechanisms of this load compensation are relevant to disease
and to the breathing systems we impose in anaesthesia.
When a load is added — such as an increased airway resistance, a stiff lung,
or the external resistance of a breathing apparatus — the immediate effect would be
to reduce the tidal volume for a given effort. Several mechanisms oppose this.
There is an intrinsic, immediate property of the respiratory muscles,
whereby the force generated increases with the load,
partly through the length-tension relationship.
There is a rapid reflex compensation:
the muscle spindles and other proprioceptors in the respiratory muscles,
and the vagal lung receptors, sense the reduced movement and reflexly increase the
drive.
Over the longer term, the chemical control responds:
if the load reduces ventilation enough to raise the carbon dioxide,
the chemoreceptors increase the drive. So a healthy person can maintain ventilation
against considerable loads, though at the cost of increased work.
So the respiratory system compensates for an added mechanical load by the intrinsic
load-dependence of the muscles, by rapid reflex augmentation of drive from muscle
and lung proprioceptors, and by the chemical response to any rise in carbon
dioxide; defending ventilation against increased resistance or elastance,
at the cost of greater work — mechanisms relevant to obstructive disease and to
anaesthetic breathing systems.
Describe the diving response and the physiology of breath-holding.
The diving response and breath-holding illustrate the interplay between the
voluntary suspension of breathing and the powerful automatic drives,
and the diving response is a striking reflex conserving oxygen,
of some relevance to anaesthesia.
Breath-holding begins as a voluntary act,
the cortex suspending the automatic rhythm;
but it is limited by the breaking point,
at which the rising carbon dioxide and falling oxygen generate an overwhelming urge
to breathe, so that voluntary apnoea cannot be sustained to the point of harm in
air — though prior hyperventilation, by lowering the carbon dioxide,
can dangerously delay the breaking point until hypoxia causes loss of
consciousness, the basis of shallow-water blackout.
The diving response is a reflex, pronounced in diving mammals and present in
humans, triggered by immersion of the face in cold water and by apnoea:
it produces a bradycardia, a peripheral vasoconstriction redistributing blood to
the heart and brain, and a reduced cardiac output — an oxygen-conserving reflex,
mediated by the trigeminal afferents and the autonomic system.
So breath-holding is a voluntary apnoea limited by the breaking point of rising
carbon dioxide and falling oxygen — dangerously delayed by prior hyperventilation;
and the diving response, triggered by cold-water face immersion and apnoea,
produces bradycardia, vasoconstriction and reduced output to conserve oxygen —
illustrating the limits of voluntary control and a powerful protective reflex.
How is breathing coordinated with swallowing, speech and other behaviours?
Because the airway is shared with functions such as swallowing and speech,
breathing must be coordinated with these behaviours,
and this coordination is managed by the integration of the respiratory control with
other brainstem and cortical centres, its failure risking aspiration.
Swallowing requires that breathing be momentarily suspended and the airway
protected: during a swallow, breathing is briefly inhibited — deglutition apnoea —
and the larynx is closed and elevated,
the epiglottis directing the bolus away from the airway,
so that food does not enter the trachea;
this is coordinated by the brainstem swallowing centre acting in concert with the
respiratory centres.
Speech requires fine control of the expiratory airflow against the adducted vocal
cords, with breathing subordinated to the demands of phonation — long,
controlled expirations punctuated by quick inspirations — under cortical control.
Coughing, sneezing, vomiting and straining each involve stereotyped modifications
of the respiratory pattern and the glottis.
Anaesthesia, by obtunding these reflexes and their coordination,
impairs airway protection and risks aspiration.
So breathing is coordinated with swallowing by a brief deglutition apnoea with
laryngeal closure protecting the airway,
with speech by subordinating expiration to phonation under cortical control,
and with coughing and other acts by stereotyped patterns; this coordination,
managed by the integration of brainstem centres,
being obtunded by anaesthesia with a risk of aspiration.
Describe the effects of opioids on the control of breathing.
The opioids have characteristic and clinically critical effects on the control of
breathing, producing a dose-dependent respiratory depression that is the principal
danger of their use, and that follows from their action on the brainstem
respiratory neurons.
Acting on the opioid receptors, particularly the mu receptors,
which are present in the respiratory centres including the pre-Botzinger complex,
the opioids depress the respiratory drive.
The characteristic pattern is a reduction in the respiratory rate — a slowing and,
at higher doses, irregularity — more than a reduction in tidal volume,
progressing to apnoea; this contrasts with the rapid shallow pattern of some other
depressants.
They depress the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide,
shifting the response curve to the right and reducing its slope,
so a higher carbon dioxide is tolerated;
and they depress the hypoxic ventilatory response.
They also depress the cough reflex and obtund the airway reflexes.
These effects are potentiated by other depressants and in certain patients,
and are reversible by the antagonist naloxone.
So the opioids cause a dose-dependent respiratory depression by acting on mu
receptors in the respiratory centres,
characteristically slowing the respiratory rate towards apnoea,
depressing the carbon-dioxide and hypoxic ventilatory responses,
and suppressing the cough — reversible by naloxone;
the central concern in their perioperative use and a constant consideration in
anaesthesia.
Describe the proprioceptive feedback from the respiratory muscles and chest wall.
The respiratory muscles and the chest wall, like other skeletal muscles and joints,
contain proprioceptors that provide feedback to the respiratory control,
contributing to the regulation of the force and pattern of breathing and to the
sensation of breathing.
The intercostal muscles, in particular, contain muscle spindles,
which sense the length and the rate of change of length of the muscle and provide a
stretch-reflex feedback; through this,
the intercostal muscles participate in load compensation,
reflexly increasing their drive when their shortening is opposed by a load.
The diaphragm has relatively few spindles but has tendon organs sensing tension.
There are also receptors in the joints and tendons of the chest wall and in the
airways.
This proprioceptive information serves several roles:
it contributes to the reflex matching of the muscle force to the load,
to the fine adjustment of the breathing pattern, and, importantly,
to the conscious sensation of breathing and of the effort of breathing — the
feedback comparing the achieved with the intended movement contributing to the
sensation of dyspnoea when they mismatch.
So the respiratory muscles and chest wall provide proprioceptive feedback — chiefly
from the intercostal muscle spindles,
with tendon organs and joint receptors — contributing to load compensation by
stretch reflexes, to the fine control of the breathing pattern,
and to the conscious sensation of breathing and of dyspnoea;
a sensory feedback complementing the chemical and pulmonary inputs.
Describe the modern understanding of central chemoreception and the retrotrapezoid
nucleus.
The understanding of the central chemoreceptors has advanced beyond a single
ventral-medullary site, and the retrotrapezoid nucleus is now regarded as a
principal integrating site, though chemosensitivity is distributed.
The classical view located the central chemoreceptors at the ventral surface of the
medulla, sensing the pH of the surrounding fluid.
The modern view recognises several chemosensitive brainstem regions but identifies
the retrotrapezoid nucleus, near the ventral medulla, as key:
its neurons are intrinsically sensitive to carbon dioxide and pH,
both directly and through signals from surrounding glial cells,
which themselves sense carbon dioxide and release transmitters;
and the nucleus is tightly linked to the rhythm-generating network.
Other regions, including parts of the raphe and the locus coeruleus,
also contribute. This distributed chemosensitivity,
integrated through the retrotrapezoid nucleus,
drives the response to carbon dioxide.
So the modern understanding holds that central chemosensitivity is distributed but
integrated principally at the retrotrapezoid nucleus,
whose neurons sense carbon dioxide and pH directly and via glia and which links to
the rhythm generator — a refinement of the classical single-site view,
underlying the carbon-dioxide drive.
Describe the abnormal patterns of breathing seen with brainstem lesions.
Lesions at different levels of the brainstem produce characteristic abnormal
breathing patterns, because respiratory control is hierarchically organised,
so the pattern helps localise the lesion in the neurologically injured patient.
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, the crescendo-decrescendo pattern alternating with
apnoea, occurs with bilateral hemispheric or diencephalic dysfunction,
or a long circulatory delay.
Central neurogenic hyperventilation, a sustained rapid deep breathing,
accompanies lesions of the midbrain and upper pons.
Apneustic breathing — prolonged inspiratory pauses,
a cramp of inspiration — occurs with mid- or lower-pontine lesions,
from loss of the inspiratory off-switch normally provided by the pontine centres.
Ataxic, or Biot's, breathing — a chaotic,
irregular pattern of breaths and pauses — occurs with medullary lesions near the
rhythm generator and heralds respiratory failure;
a medullary lesion may abolish breathing altogether.
So brainstem lesions give localising patterns:
Cheyne-Stokes with hemispheric or diencephalic dysfunction,
central neurogenic hyperventilation with upper-pontine lesions,
apneustic breathing with mid-pontine loss of the off-switch,
and ataxic Biot's breathing with medullary lesions — patterns reflecting the level
of injury and warning of impending respiratory failure.
Describe the sensation of breathlessness, or dyspnoea.
Dyspnoea is the conscious, distressing awareness of difficult or uncomfortable
breathing, and although subjective,
it has identifiable bases that follow from the control of breathing and its sensory
feedback.
It is not one sensation but several qualities — air hunger, increased effort,
and chest tightness — with different mechanisms.
A principal mechanism is a mismatch between the respiratory drive and the achieved
ventilation: when the brain commands a level of breathing but the feedback from
lung and chest-wall receptors signals that the achieved ventilation is inadequate,
this neuromechanical dissociation is sensed as dyspnoea,
occurring when breathing is loaded or the muscles weakened.
The sense of increased effort arises from awareness of the large motor command sent
to the respiratory muscles. Air hunger is driven powerfully by a rising carbon
dioxide and by hypoxia acting on the chemoreceptors,
and by the J-receptors in pulmonary congestion.
So dyspnoea is the distressing awareness of breathing,
arising chiefly from a mismatch between respiratory drive and achieved ventilation,
from awareness of increased effort, and from air hunger driven by carbon dioxide,
hypoxia and the J-receptors — a sensation with definable mechanisms in the control
and feedback of breathing, and a cardinal symptom of respiratory and cardiac
disease.
Describe fetal breathing movements and their significance.
Although the fetus does not breathe air, gas exchange occurring at the placenta,
it makes breathing movements in utero,
and these are important for lung development and as a sign of fetal wellbeing.
From relatively early in gestation, the fetus makes episodic,
rhythmic movements of the diaphragm and chest wall,
moving amniotic fluid in and out of the airways rather than air;
they occur chiefly during periods of active,
rapid-eye-movement-like sleep and are influenced by maternal factors and the fetal
blood gases.
Their significance is twofold.
First, they are essential for normal lung development: the movements,
with the maintenance of lung liquid volume,
provide the stretch and mechanical environment necessary for the lungs to grow and
mature, their absence leading to pulmonary hypoplasia.
Second, their presence serves as a sign of fetal wellbeing in the biophysical
profile, since they are reduced or abolished by fetal hypoxia and distress.
So the fetus makes episodic rhythmic breathing movements in utero,
moving fluid not air, chiefly in active sleep;
essential for normal lung development by providing the mechanical stimulus,
and serving as a sign of fetal wellbeing, reduced by hypoxia — a preparation for,
and an indicator of, the readiness to breathe.
Describe the initiation of breathing at birth.
The transition from fetal life, with gas exchange at the placenta,
to air breathing requires the newborn to take its first breaths and establish
continuous breathing within moments of delivery,
a critical transition driven by several stimuli.
In utero, continuous breathing is suppressed; at birth, several factors combine.
The asphyxia of birth itself — the transient hypoxia,
hypercapnia and acidosis as the placental circulation ceases — strongly stimulates
the chemoreceptors and the respiratory centre.
The sudden sensory stimulation of birth — cold, handling,
light and sound — arouses and stimulates breathing.
The removal of the factors that suppressed fetal breathing also contributes.
The first breaths must overcome the high surface tension and the resistance of the
fluid-filled lungs, requiring very large negative pressures to inflate them and
clear the lung liquid, after which breathing eases as the functional residual
capacity is established and surfactant spreads;
the establishment of breathing then drives the circulatory transition.
So breathing is initiated at birth by the asphyxial stimulation of the
chemoreceptors, the sensory stimulation of delivery,
and the removal of fetal suppression;
the first breaths needing large pressures to overcome surface tension,
clear lung liquid and establish the functional residual capacity — a critical
transition whose failure requires resuscitation.
Describe congenital central hypoventilation syndrome.
Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, historically called Ondine's curse,
is a rare disorder of the automatic control of breathing that vividly illustrates
the distinction between automatic and voluntary control.
It is caused by a genetic abnormality affecting the development of the autonomic
nervous system and the central chemoreceptor and respiratory control pathways.
Its hallmark is a failure of the automatic control of breathing,
particularly during sleep: the affected individual breathes adequately when awake,
under the voluntary and behavioural drive, but when asleep,
when breathing depends on automatic chemical control,
hypoventilates severely or stops, because the automatic response to carbon dioxide
and hypoxia is grossly deficient — they do not increase ventilation as the carbon
dioxide rises and oxygen falls.
This requires ventilatory support during sleep, and in severe cases at all times.
The name derives from the myth of a man condemned to remember to breathe.
So congenital central hypoventilation syndrome is a genetic failure of the
automatic control of breathing, with a deficient chemoreceptor response,
so breathing is adequate awake but fails in sleep when it depends on automatic
control — requiring ventilatory support;
a rare disorder demonstrating the separateness of the automatic and voluntary
control of breathing.
Describe the effect of body temperature and metabolic rate on breathing.
Breathing is matched to the metabolic rate and is also affected directly by
temperature, relationships relevant in fever and in temperature disturbances under
anaesthesia.
The fundamental coupling is to metabolism:
since ventilation's chief role is to excrete the carbon dioxide produced and supply
the oxygen consumed, it is regulated to match the metabolic rate,
so an increase — from exercise, fever or thyroid overactivity — raises carbon
dioxide production and so ventilation, while a fall reduces it.
Temperature also acts directly: a rise in body temperature stimulates ventilation,
both through the increased metabolic rate and by a direct effect on the respiratory
centre, contributing to the tachypnoea of fever;
hypothermia depresses the respiratory centre and reduces ventilation,
while also lowering metabolic rate and carbon dioxide production.
These matter under anaesthesia, where temperature is often disturbed,
and notably in malignant hyperthermia,
where a greatly increased metabolic rate drives a high carbon dioxide and
ventilation.
So breathing is matched to the metabolic rate,
rising with the increased carbon dioxide production of exercise,
fever and hypermetabolism and falling with reduced metabolism;
and temperature acts directly, fever stimulating and hypothermia depressing the
respiratory centre — couplings relevant to fever,
hypothermia and hypermetabolic states in anaesthesia.
Describe the effects of the different anaesthetic agents on the pattern of
breathing.
The anaesthetic agents all depress breathing but with characteristic patterns,
knowledge of which helps in managing the spontaneously breathing patient.
The volatile inhalational agents cause a characteristic rapid, shallow breathing:
they reduce the tidal volume and increase the rate,
with an overall fall in alveolar ventilation and a dose-dependent rise in carbon
dioxide, and they depress the carbon-dioxide and, markedly, the hypoxic response.
The intravenous agent propofol depresses ventilation and commonly causes apnoea on
induction, with dose-dependent depression of the carbon-dioxide response.
The opioids characteristically slow the respiratory rate towards apnoea while the
tidal volume is relatively preserved at first,
depressing the carbon-dioxide and hypoxic responses.
Ketamine is relatively sparing of respiratory drive,
tending to preserve breathing and airway reflexes though increasing secretions.
The benzodiazepines cause mild depression, potentiated with opioids.
So the volatile agents cause rapid shallow breathing with a dose-dependent fall in
alveolar ventilation, propofol depresses ventilation and causes apnoea on
induction, opioids slow the rate towards apnoea,
ketamine relatively preserves breathing,
and benzodiazepines cause mild depression — all depressing the carbon-dioxide and
hypoxic responses, patterns whose knowledge guides the management of spontaneous
ventilation.
Describe gasping and its role in autoresuscitation.
Gasping is a distinct, primitive breathing pattern emerging in severe hypoxia when
normal breathing fails, generated by the brainstem,
with a recognised role in autoresuscitation.
It is quite different from normal eupnoeic breathing: brief, sudden,
maximal inspiratory efforts that recruit the inspiratory muscles abruptly and
maximally, separated by long pauses.
It is generated by a distinct medullary mechanism that takes over when severe
hypoxia depresses the normal rhythm generation — a last-resort pattern.
Its functional significance is as an autoresuscitation mechanism:
in severe hypoxia or early cardiac arrest, gasping can move air and,
by its large efforts, sometimes restore oxygenation and help re-establish normal
breathing and circulation, particularly in the newborn and in early arrest.
Its recognition is clinically important:
agonal gasping in cardiac arrest is not normal breathing and must not be mistaken
for it, being a sign of arrest requiring resuscitation.
So gasping is a primitive pattern of brief,
maximal inspiratory efforts from a distinct medullary mechanism when severe hypoxia
depresses normal breathing; it serves as autoresuscitation that can help restore
breathing, especially in the newborn and early arrest — and agonal gasping must be
recognised as a sign of cardiac arrest, not effective breathing.
Thank you. A clear overview. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Breathing is both automatic and voluntary:
a brainstem controller generates the rhythm,
chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors are the sensors,
and the respiratory muscles are the effectors — a negative-feedback system
maintaining the arterial blood gases (chiefly PaCO2),
with voluntary cortical override for speech and behaviour.
Second, The respiratory centres: medullary dorsal respiratory group (inspiration,
receives vagal/glossopharyngeal afferents) and ventral respiratory group
(inspiration + expiration, contains the rhythm-generating pre-Botzinger complex);
pontine centres (formerly pneumotaxic) fine-tune and limit inspiration.
The basic rhythm is generated intrinsically by the pre-Botzinger complex's
pacemaker network, driving a ramping inspiratory activity then switching off for
passive expiration. 3.
Slowly-adapting pulmonary stretch receptors (vagal) mediate the Hering-Breuer
inflation reflex — inhibiting further inspiration to prevent over-inflation (weak
in adults except at large tidal volumes/exercise/ventilation;
important in newborns), with a weaker deflation reflex.
Third, Rapidly-adapting irritant receptors mediate bronchoconstriction,
cough and augmented breaths; juxtacapillary (J) receptors,
stimulated by capillary congestion/interstitial oedema,
cause rapid shallow breathing and breathlessness (dyspnoea of pulmonary oedema);
chest-wall/muscle proprioceptors add feedback.
Fourth, Anaesthesia depresses the control of breathing — blunting the CO2 response
(rightward shift, reduced slope) and especially the hypoxic ventilatory response
(even at subanaesthetic concentrations), slowing rate (opioids),
and abolishing the voluntary/wakefulness drive — causing hypoventilation and loss
of protective responses, so ventilation must be monitored and supported.
Thank you. That concludes the station.